Craig: Hi, my name is
Craig Smith and this is Eye on AI
This week I speak with Lieutenant General
Michael S. Groen who took over as director
of the Department of Defense Joint Artificial
Intelligence Center in October last year.
General Groen likes to say that he is overseeing
JAIC 2.0 after the center was established by his
predecessor, Lieutenant General Jack Shanahan.
Under General Groen, the JAIC will focus
less on building products
and focus more on building the framework
in which the 20 plus agencies in the Department
of Defense can build and implement AI. I hope you
find the conversation as interesting as I did.
Welcome General Groen. What I'd like to do is
start by having you introduce yourself,
give a little bit of background,
where you grew up, how you got into the
military and how you ended up as director
of the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center.
Gen. Groen: Great. Well, thanks Craig. Really,
really appreciate you having me on the show.
I'm a big fan I've followed your coverage,
especially of the NSCAI commissioners. That's
been really helpful. As you probably know,
or you can figure out from their words, the JAIC
has its roots in that conversation with the NSCAI.
And so, we're grateful to that conversation
and to those members and everybody else who's
working on the AI problem here in Defense.
So, I'm very fortunate to be a member of the
JAIC, the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center.
The JAIC is a small but mighty organization.
We have of an entire department to transform.
And so, we've got a lot of work ahead of us.
The JAIC is full of military and civilian
members all committed to the transformation
of military capabilities for an information
age. And it's so easy to see that in the world,
around us, yet defense lags in the
application of those technologies.
Myself, I grew up in Michigan as a Midwestern boy.
I'm just a hard working Marine, but I really care
very deeply about this because I do see this as
a strategic effort. Thinking about technology and
its impact on war fighting, you look at things
like revolutions in military affairs past, you
see examples of militaries and organizations kind
of walking into an environment that's completely
changed, but yet they're unaware of that change,
even if they've seen the artifacts of that.
And that's, and that's kind of really what
primarily drives our concern. So, I grew up in the
Intel community, but I've been an operational
commander. I've been in the Joint Staff,
I've been an acquisition and requirements officer.
I have a good STEM background. So, I'm far from
an expert in anything here, but I do think I
understand war fighting and I really have a
goal and a vision for how we integrate AI to make
our war fighting much more effective. And so,
if you don't mind, let me just tell
you a little bit about the JAIC.
I know, not, not all of your listeners probably
even really know what the JAIC is, perhaps. So,
the JAIC Is the Joint Artificial Intelligence
Center, and our mission is to transform the
Department through the integration of artificial
intelligence. The JAIC is an implementation
organization, so our priority is making consumers
across the Department successful in transforming
their enterprises with artificial intelligence.
And to meet that mission, we look to accelerate
the adoption of AI. And so, we're looking across
the scope and scale of the Department of Defense.
And you can readily see the challenge of that
scope and scale. I mean, the Department of Defense
is on the order of 3 million people on
the order of $700 billion enterprise.
So, you see the challenge, but you can
also just as readily see the necessity.
If there's any place that we should have efficient
and effective enterprises driven by modern
information technology to include artificial
intelligence, the Department of Defense is it.
And so, we're really excited about the challenge.
What's really compelling to largely young members
in the Department - the Department of Defense
is a fairly youthful organization, if you
look at it in aggregate - they grew up in a
world surrounded by artificial intelligence.
Hundreds of times of day, we all touch artificial
intelligence, but it's penetrated the Department
of Defense to a much, much lesser degree.
And our mission here in the JAIC is to change
that. We see how information
makes things move faster,
makes processes more efficient. And so, we live that
every day, but the impacts on warfare
are still unclear. They're imminently foreseeable,
right? Because we live in this universe. But the
risk is that they will not be foreseen.
And so, part of our job in implementation
is to get people to understand, to foresee
what's foreseeable and to make the changes
that we can now. It'd be unconscionable
for the Department to not be prepared
for the changes that we can readily foresee.
And so, that's why the Department
in partnership with Congress, created the JAIC.
It's an implementation organization. We are not
a research-y organization. We have deep ties
to the research and development and engineering
elements of the Department of Defense. We
have a great relationship with DARPA, with R&E,
but our role is focused on implementation.
We want to take technology and turn it into
capability. Our first priority is to broadly
enable AI consumers across the Department
so that we can achieve scale. Our
second priority is to develop and
deliver AI capabilities and enabling services.
So, we build AIs here in the JAIC and we field
them, only second in priority to enabling others,
to integrate AI into their own enterprises.
Thirdly, we coordinate and synchronize the
integration of all of the capabilities that are
largely being developed by the services in the
Department into a cohesive enterprise, to make
it effective, make it efficient and allow smooth
seamless operations across domains and services.
And then finally, we mature the supporting
structures of an AI friendly ecosystem, right? So,
we want to create the conditions for life. I love
to think of that analogy. We set the conditions
for life and we have a Cambrian explosion of
artificial intelligence across the Department.
That's what we're after. And so, our energy that
goes into implementation, it's all about achieving
that objective.
Craig:Can you talk about the joint war fighting
national mission initiative? What's the scope
and how it's organized. I've read about the five
lines of effort. And I won't repeat them here,
but it's not clear to me at this point,
whether they involve particular weapon systems.
And if they do, I'd love to hear
what some of the most ambitious are.
Gen. Groen: Yeah, sure. Of course. So, the joint
war fighting national mission initiative or we
just call it joint warfighting here in the
JAIC, it represents those AI developments
that we're building inside the JAIC.
Remember, most of the AI initiatives
across the Department are done in the services.
So, the services are developing capabilities,
responsive to their own war fighting requirements,
but we are partners in all of those. We're partners
with all the services, but we also then
build some of these things ourselves.
Again, in partnership with one or more of the
other agencies or services in the Department.
So, joint war fighting; what that means to us
is we've aligned our AI development roughly
with the war fighting functions and for, for
those who might not be familiar with that,
the Department identifies joint
war fighting functions and it bins
things into: Command and Control is one; Maneuver;
Fires; Intelligence; Logistics; and Force Protection;
and Cyber and Information. We've aligned our
development efforts then with those war fighting
functions. The reason we do that is because then
we can work with the communities who are already.
In that space, for example the Army and their
Project Convergence, which you've probably
heard about. They're very much into optimizing
Command and Control and Fires application.
And so, we can work with them then because
we're organized in a way that matches
their approach. So, in Joint All Domain
Command Control, for example, the AIs that
were working there include things that drive, like,decision-making; decision-making for commanders
on the battlefield, decision-making for theater commanders
whohave large scale strategic problems that they're faced with.So, to help battlefieldunderstanding,
to help situational awareness,
those are things that we do under what we
call All Domain Command and Control.
And there's an obvious linkage there to the future of that Joint All Domain Command and Control project.
Our next line of effort, we call it Overmatch; maneuver and tempo, right? So, it's all about now, on the battlefield,
understanding the threat. What is the threat doing? What threats are posed? What risks are on the battlefield,
right now?And then, understanding Blue. As important as understanding the enemy when you're making
decisions in a war fighting environment is understanding yourself, right?
So, you
have to know what's the status of your forces.
Where are their logistics challenges, for example.
If Alpha Company's out of fuel, well then that's going to impact the way you plan your operation.
So, using AI to help commanders make data-driven decisions, not through a bank of phones,
calling down to every unit, but data that's
generated in the force and presented to
the commander, so this commander, he,
or she, can make good smart decisions about
how to win. That's what we call Overmatch.
We're, we've also got a line of effort
along the lines of Joint Fires, right? So,
this takes the form of integrating intelligence
and fire. So how do you use the intelligence that
that's produced on the battlefield and turn
that into responsive decisions quickly? And so,
all of these are designed to tee up decisions
for commanders in much faster ways and in much
higher quality than they might be able to do
without the use of artificial intelligence.
We have another line of effort that deals
with the electromagnetic spectrum, cyber and
information warfare. Our work in those areas help
us understand the cyber domain, help commanders
understand what is happening in the information
space, leveraging things like natural language
processing, for example, to understand media in a
foreign language. That sort of thing, it's a fairly
standard capability in the AI community, but what
we're doing is applying those capabilities for
military problems. So that commanders, again, can
make better decisions. And then the final one,
strategic logistics. Personally, I'm really
excited about logistics. Amateurs study tactics
and professionals study logistics. And when
you look at the vast logistics enterprise
and the capital that's invested in that
enterprise and how critical that is to operations,
helping logisticians and mobility leaders make
decisions about how fast to move things, how much
fuel do we actually need? How do we have to get
it there? How about ammunition? How about people?
How about medical? All of those things should be
data-driven and all of those things should be at
the fingertips of a commander so that a commander
and his staff can make better decisions about
strategic mobility and strategic logistics.
And so, those are the kinds of things that
were working. And again, none
of those, we work in isolation.
All of those, we're trying to work with partners
in the Department who have a vested interest
in making sure that those kinds of things are
successful. One of the other things that really
helps us, because we have, we have our fingers
in all of the different war fighting functions,
that really puts us in a good position
to integrate these things into fabrics
of capabilities. Right? What we want is,
as capabilities are developed across these
war-fighting functions, that development converges
on an integrated capability. That's not a natural
act inside the Department of Defense, right?
So, if we can get the developments to converge,
right, to actually steer these things
to an integrated combat capability,
that’s at the heart of joint war fighting.
That's what we're really excited about. So,
we want a force that understands its environment,
a force that has a court sense, right?
For the battlefield environment across multiple
domains. That's not easy to build. A force that
has an ethical basis for its actions and
a force that can move very, very fast,
right? Make good decisions and move fast to pose
challenges for an opponent. And that's what our
whole joint war fighting effort is all about.
Craig: all of them that you've mentioned relate
to data analysis and information flows. People,
myself included are always eager to hear about
specific weapons systems, particularly
when it comes to artificial intelligence.
Are there any weapons systems within that
that are public and that you can talk about?
Gen. Groen: We think that systems that help
enable commanders to, to, to do effective
command and control is a weapon system, right?
Because it is critical to combat capability.
So, through that lens, I would say, yes,
absolutely. We're designing those weapons systems.
But again, all of those weapons systems are
to facilitate and make more efficient and
effective war-fighting functions that we already
execute. We have not taken major steps into
what you would call autonomy, right?
Department of Defense has a very well-defined
autonomy policy and regulations. If any of
your readers want to take a look at this,
look at the, the DOD 3000.09, which is the
autonomy policy for the Department. And
it's very clear and it's very effective.
And it's unprecedented, right? The United
States has put its marker down for the level
of human control that it will use in weapons
systems and weapons systems development. That's an
accomplishment we should be proud of as a nation.
But within that most of the programs
we're developing here are focused on data,
ISR data management, integrating data flows from
places in the intelligence community, for example,
so that we can use that data more effectively
for decision-making, being predictive and having
the ability to forecast based on modeling
and simulation of data flows that we have.
So generally, I think the common theme that you
would hear in the things that we're developing,
it's all about helping humans
make better decisions and
helping to generate man machine teams.
In a modern war fighting environment in
any war fighting environment, why would we
ever send flesh against steel, as it were?
Why would you put a human in harm's way If you
could put a machine in that place first? That's
the kind of stuff that we're talking about today.
Craig: Yeah, I wasn't referring necessarily to
autonomy. I'm particularly interested in
swarm technology and I've been reading
what's coming out of China. China's done
a lot of research on swarm technology,
even publicly. There was a paper within the last
month or so out of a Chinese university about
drones swarms navigating through a forest,
which I found fascinating. When I said specific
weapons systems, I was really referring to putting
AI into weapons for things like navigating through
interior environments and that sort of thing.
How much of what the DOD does is driven
by what China's doing.
Gen. Groen: Yeah. So, yeah,
that's a great question. Obviously, we keep a
very close eye on what the People's Liberation
Army is doing with AI integration. I would say,
most of what we're doing is in response to the
transformation of warfare in an information
age. We see this technology around us
in the commercial environment every day. We know
what's possible. And if you look at a Department
of Defense process or a war fighting process,
you should step back and ask yourself, well, how
would this internet company handle this problem,
or how would that internet company handle this
problem? Right? If you're creating a marketplace
for material, for example, well, the internet is
loaded with storefronts and delivery mechanisms
and payment mechanisms. And all of those things
have an analog in the defense enterprise.
And so, we don't have to go far to, to be
fired in your imagination of how you could apply
AI. And so most of what we do, and I think across
the Department, not just the JAIC, it's in response
to this transformation. We can see the war fighting
imperative for modernization and we're doing it in
a purposely transparent, ethical, and responsible way.
When we try to make defense as effective and
efficient as, as the commercial enterprises
around us, then I think we're moving in the right
direction. The other thing we are driven by our
international partnerships. So here at the
JAIC, it's very clear in our conversations
with our international partners, and there are
several, you could probably guess most of them,
you know, we share an ethical foundation for AI
and we share the same kind of concerns about
human control and autonomy, and the ethical basis
upon which you build your AI capabilities. And so,
we actually have a partnership with
12 other nations. There's 13 of us now.
We call it the AI Partnership for Defense, and
we use this group of like-minded democracies,
that are as conscious as we are of the ethical
challenges in this environment, to a shared
commitment, right? To be accountable, accountable
to each other and accountable to our citizens.
And, in the context of China that you mentioned,
the U S has published clear ethical and policy
positions on AI, autonomy, accountability, and
we're investing in this ethical foundation.
The Chinese Communist Party and the PLA stand
in marked contrast to that. The Chinese have vocally
and aggressively articulated their goal to
use AI to make the world's most powerful
military. They've got highly publicized
goals of dominance in the AI space.
Well, clearly, we watch closely the efforts of
the PLA to modernize their force and they have
their doctrine of informationalized warfare and
intelligentized warfare. And so, it's very clear.
They're focused on integrating AI into their
weapons systems in their approach. And again,
I think that unified approach of the military
civil fusion enabled by the Chinese Communist
Party and the PLA uses state-owned enterprises to drive
military AI capabilities into the PLA, for example,
without the same sort of accountability
checks that we have in our system. There is no
accountability to the people in that system.
Whereas in our system, we have very close
oversight in everything that we do. So is
what we're doing driven by China? Certainly,
we pay close attention. Certainly, we see the
artifacts that China invests in. Things like the
national intelligence law that compels Chinese
citizens abroad for work or study or whatever
to report their study and findings to the CCP.
We know that puts US tech industry, the tech
firms and universities in a very difficult
position because they know that Chinese
citizens will be compelled to tell everything
that they've learned when they get back home.
That kind of stuff, that kind of environment,
just gives us cause for concern about the
ethical baseline for AI development in the PRC.
And so, does that drive our specific development?
We certainly keep a close eye on it. We certainly
want to understand what they're doing and we also
want to make clear so that our partners and our
allies, those who share the ethical foundations
we do, are also paying attention to that.
We can't pretend that's not the case,
so it gives us cause for concern and it doesn't
drive us per se, but it would be imprudent for us
not to keep our eyes on that contact.
Craig: I have a couple of questions on your
ascension to the director's role,
which coincides with the JAIC being moved out
from under the DOD's Chief Information Officer,
to report directly to the Deputy
Secretary of Defense. How is that
likely to impact the JAIC's effectiveness?
Gen. Groen: Yeah, that's a great question,
Craig, because first of all, I think it's
an important expression of the priority
that Congress places on AI integration.
To me that's a really powerful message here.
Congress cares enough that they want to ensure
that the Department is focused on this transition
of AI and AI integration. So, first, first of all,
I would also say we have great partnerships with
the Chief Information Officer and the deputy CIOs.
So, software engineer is important to us. Cloud is
important to us. Security is important to us. And
so were joined at the hip with those elements of
digital modernization across the Department, but
frankly, artificial intelligence is different.
Right? because it actually has a
significant impact on our mission.
AI is not IT. The implementation of AI is
foundationally about the decision processes
that occur in the department, whether
those are war fighting decisions or support
enterprise decisions or business decisions.
So, we like to say here that we want AI to
be our military future. I mean that if we want AI
to be our military future, then we have to start
making it our military present. Right. And that
means that the JAIC has to be a partner across
the Department to make it so, and being linked
to the Dep[uty] Sec[retary of] Def[ense] in that
regard really helps us make those partnerships.
So, to get back to AI is not IT, our biggest
challenge is not technology. I mean, the
technology is mature. The technology exists.
Of course, it continues to develop. Of course,
risks come and counter risks come and, we'll
continue to follow the flow of AI technology.
But honestly, for a lot of our core missions,
things like business process transformation inside
the Department of Defense, the tech is there.
It's just a matter of imagination
and implementation. And so,
to get that imagination and implementation applied
in the places where AI can help the Department,
we don't need IT people to think about it. We
need decision-makers. We need functional experts.
We need technical experts in comptroller
activities or logistics activities. Or,
as we move into the war fighting domain, into
fires activities, or intelligence activities.
We need those functional experts to weigh in
on how to use AI to change their processes.
If AI is perceived as IT, it's some black box
that I put on my desk and maybe I'll log into it,
then we have failed. We have to think about this
as a war fighting capability, as a Department
capability for effective and efficient operations.
And that means people, decision makers,
leaders have to be right in the fight here.
Craig: And another part of that question,
do the various AI initiatives in
the services now report to the JAIC,
or is the JAIC playing a coordinating role just
to ensure there aren't duplications of effort
and to track who's doing what?
Gen. Groen: Okay. Yeah. Great, great question.
So yes, there are a thousand flowers blooming
across the Department for artificial intelligence.
I think every senior leader in the Department
of Defense understands, kind of in their bones,
that there's a transformation afoot here
and that we need to get out in front of it.
And so, every service has a robust effort
at building artificial intelligence.
Many of the 20-plus defense agencies that
are part of the Department of Defense are
interested in AI and some of them,
some of the defense agencies have
great artificial intelligence networks already.
So, the JAIC doesn't direct those individual
efforts, but we are the catalyst to
achieving this broad transformation.
So, as a, as I kind of indicated before the
JAIC's a tool to enable broad implementation.
So those places that maybe are not moving as fast
as they would like in artificial intelligence,
we're designed to help them. We want to
create that tide that lifts all boats
across the Department. So, our work includes
implementation then extends to bringing stovepiped
capabilities into cohesive enterprise.
And that sounds obvious, but I think,
anybody who's spent time in the Department of
Defense knows that, we just naturally create
these horrendous stovepipes. And so, every
service will develop their own capabilities.
And then we'll try to lash them together
at the last minute or lash our war-fighting
constructs together using those capabilities.
And so, the JAIC serves as a catalyst by doing
things like establishing governance, establishing
sound ethical foundations that everybody follows,
to build test and evaluation standards. And that's
our role here as the center to actually now start
turning technology initiatives in artificial
intelligence into real integrated capabilities
among the services, among the domains,
airspace, sea land, and then to help move the
ball forward on enterprising those capabilities.
Craig: The pandemic relief bill requires you to
create an inventory of all ongoing AI activities
across the Department and services. Tracking AI
projects has been a challenge because there isn't
an easy way to identify them short of a qualitative
survey. Can you talk about that inventory?
Does an inventory exist already within the
JAIC? Whether you already have an idea of
how much money has been allocated for those
projects that are underway?
Gen. Groen: Great question.
And we're actually really happy with this
task because we want to create an environment
of accountability and transparency around
the integration of artificial intelligence.
In fact, I think that JAIC is probably the only
organization that can actually pull this off.
And as an artifact of our relationship
with the Dep[uty] Sec[retary of] Def[ense]
it's kind of a natural task for us to take on.
It is through our relationship with the Dep[uty]
Sec[retary of] Def[ense] that we have
access across the department. And so
that's a really important thing
inside the building here. So,
given the scale and scope of the defense
enterprise, diving into this task is not
for the faint hearted. Certainly, all
spending is accounted for in the Department.
But when you look at money spent. Looking at what
it was spent on and agreeing to a definition of AI
and labeling like specific expenditures as AI
related or not is a really grueling proposition.
So historically these kinds of tasks are done by
survey and we have an AI executive steering group
here in the Department to help us define kind of
what is AI spending and what isn't AI spending.
And we'll use that. But, I love this
task because it reveals so much,
right? This is like an archetype of the kind of
digital environment that should exist in defense.
Why can't we answer that question quickly, right?
Why aren't we using AI to get to this level
of management visibility and accountability.
So naturally, we, as the JAIC, I mean, approaching
this from an AI perspective. So, yes, we have
a task and, okay, we'll get the survey, but
how do we actually build this digital environment
where the Department makes data informed decisions
continuously every day. You don't have to ask
once a year. You can ask any day you want to.
That's the kind of thing that we're trying to
do across the Department. And there's a quiet
reformation going on with several of us
in the Department, the Chief Data Officer,
the Comptroller, the Dep[uty] Sec[retary of]
Def[ense]'s office. No. And those management
tools that the department does use, we're
trying to now modernize those and get those
to be much more effective and more useful.
When it comes to just straight up dollars.
Like how much is being spent on AI. We're
just getting started on this. We have 120
day task here. But others have estimated based
on just on contracting data, that the portfolio
is on the order of $ 4 to $6 billion in a
defense base of about maybe 670 billion,
which is maybe it's less than 1%; 0.7% or so. The
JAIC obviously is just one small part of that.
But if you add up the, the AI expenditures
you still wind up with a really tiny
fraction of the Department's investments. And
so that's one of the things that as we dive into
budgeting and costs, we want to look
at the allocation of that resourcing.
So, do we have that right? Are we spending
enough on artificial intelligence?
What's the balance between the
services, how much goes into testing,
how much is spent on R&D activities or how
much is spent on implementation activities?
So were going to actually have a really good
insight into where our money is spent and what
kind of outcomes we achieve with those resources.
And hopefully your listeners are encouraged by
the fact that, many of us are really working
hard to ensure accountability for delivering
meaningful AI capabilities, measuring the
outcomes, to make sure that we're getting
what our investments would imply and then making
the most of taxpayer dollars across the board.
And so, I know Congress is really
interested in that. As the JAIC,
we're really interested in that as well.
Craig: Yeah. Although four months doesn't
sound like a lot of time to get that done.
Gen. Groen: You're absolutely right.
Craig: One question, presumably you already have
an inventory in some form. How much do you think
isn't captured in what you already know? Do
you think that you're already aware of 80%
of what's out there or less than that?
Gen. Groen: Yeah. That's probably a reasonable
figure and the rub comes in defining, okay, what
is AI spending and what is not AI spending? So,
you're building a system and it happens to
have an artificial intelligence component.
Well, does the cost of that system get
included in the roll up. Those are the kinds
of things that we have to work through now.
So, we're going to do a best effort for
Congress here. And I think the more we automate
this, the better results we're going to get.
Craig: And does your mandate include
the intelligence communities or
are they looking at things separately?
Gen. Groen: Anything that's funded
by the intelligence community,
that's an Intel appropriation,
we wouldn't touch. We will look at things in
the Department, the National Security Agency,
the Defense Intelligence Agency are
elements of the intelligence community,
but their defense agencies. And so, we'll look
at those to see what's appropriate to measure,
and what's not appropriate to measure.
I think the intent is to catalog this
within the defense appropriations, not the
intelligence community appropriations. And so,
that's the logic we'll follow and then
we can always adjust if that task changes.
Craig: you've answered this partly, but I'll go
ahead. General Shanahan brought the JAIC into
being, and you're overseeing its second phase
dubbed JAIC, 2.0. Can you describe what that
means? And I've seen you talk about problem
pull and fly away teams. Can you describe for
listeners what you mean by those terms?
Gen. Groen: So, as I said in the,
in the beginning, we are about transformation; transformation ofthe Department, transformation of our war fighting,
transformation of our businesses practices.
And so, the JAIC is only about two years old
effectively. When JAIC 1.0 was established, capital
was generated, some capital was applied and JAIC
1.0 went straight into AI development. Hey, let's
build AIs and let's start seeding the ground.
Let's start showing what's possible. And so, the
JAIC here over the last two years has developed 30
plus AI products, everything from preventive
maintenance to humanitarian assistance to
medical things like, like pathology recognition,
object detection, stuff like that. And so,
we had great product development expertise,
and that's really important. But as we looked
at this here this past fall, developing
products was not transformational enough
because as we develop products, we didn't
have like a transition partner in every case.
So even if we developed some compelling
technology, there was no guarantee that
somebody was going to grab that technology and
then implement it into a workflow or a use case or
an enterprise somewhere. And we just realized that
building products was not transformational enough.
And so, we thought about, well, how do
we have to act and operate to achieve
transformation? And scale was the kind of the
operative word. And so, what we realized is
we really need to start generating
that tide that lifts all boats.
We need to inform organizations about how they
can integrate AI and then help them do so.
And this starts with things like, helping them
assess their data readiness, helping them get an
understanding of what they need to do first. What
are the steps to actually building an architecture
that you can apply an artificial intelligence
engine to? That's what we're trying to do.
And so, we recrafted our organization a little
bit. And I want to be clear, we still build AIs,
but we're much more we're selective on which
ones we build here in house, in the JAIC. The
AI's that we build are more things that are on
the cutting edge, things that that are pushing
the state of the art here in the Department.
But we've shifted a lot of our attention and
priority to enabling others to be successful in
the AI business. And so, as we look to enable a
broad swath of AI consumers across the Department,
again, 3 million people, 20 plus agencies,
we reoriented our own organization
to go out to those organizations
to, to help them see where they might be able
to gain efficiency or effectiveness through
AI integration. So that's what we, call that a
flyaway team. So, we'll take a team of AI experts
and go meet with the functional experts of the - I'll,
just as an example, the Defense Logistics Agency.
Fantastic agency, tons and tons of data.
Right. They've got a great head start on AI
already. So, like reaching into an organization
like that to say, Hey, how can we help? And
when we figure out like how we can help.
Sometimes they don't need any help and then
we look to ways to partner, Hey, how can we work
together to achieve something better. Sometimes,
all they need is a recommendation on a contract
vehicle and they're off to the races.
Sometimes they need technical expertise. Sometimes
they need a platform, because they don't have
a platform to experiment with and try to set up,
get their data in order and get some models
in work. And so, we give them a platform
environment to work in. So, the response to all
of these different partners across the Department
is different in every case. It's a custom job
every time. But our goal is the same and that is,
to start the wheels of artificial intelligence
turning, especially in the most compelling
places, those places that have lots of data
who have really exciting use cases and are
ready to take the plunge. So, when we talk about
problem pull, if we have a fly-away team that
goes to sit down with a customer and work through,
how can we help them be successful then, then
we have to understand what their problems are.
And when we get to understanding like some key
elements of their problems, we can take those
problems back to the JAIC, to look at building
our artificial intelligence solutions to those
problems. But because we know who our transition
partner is then, so we know that if it's a
problem that's important enough that that customer is
willing to spend some money on it,
then we know it's a real problem and that helps
us focus our efforts. Again, the JAIC's a small
organization, so it helps us focus our resources
against the problems that matter the most.
Craig: And under the National Defense
Authorization Act, JAIC has been granted
acquisition authority, finally. But it's only
$75 million a year through 2025, unless I'm
mistaken. That sounds very small. Particularly
given that the Booz Allen Hamilton contract was
$800 million. What can you do with 75 million?
Doesn't that mean that you'll continue to rely
on the General Services Administration,
the Defense Innovation Unit, and other
acquisition authorities for large programs?
Gen. Groen: yeah. Great question. So,
let me put some context around that. I think.
First, just to make sure that everybody's clear
the Booz Allen Hamilton contract, that
was $800 million ceiling over five years,
and it's not just for JAIC requirements, that
contract is for services and agencies to leverage
their own requirements to get AI integration.
But to talk, just to talk about contracting here
for a minute, getting a contract in place with DOD
is no small feat, right? So, once you have one,
it's a great enabler. And, and when I look at what
the, what Congress helped us with in the NDAA here,
I see two things that are really important.
The first is an acknowledgement that the
Department is continuing to push creative
mechanisms to make the DOD a better customer.
Defense acquisition has been a very trying
process for a long time, to
put it mildly. But the leadership here in
acquisition and sustainment now is really
looking to push creative mechanisms to do this.
I mean, the ship of defense acquisition is slowly
turning and I think this is further evidence
of that. I think we have a long way to go still
in things like software acquisition,
but, this is a good indicator that
things are changing. The second thing that I
see here in this is, this is Congress trusting
the JAIC to execute this initial ceiling.
And we're very grateful for this because I think,
we've got a good dialogue with Congress here
to help understand what our goals are
with this acquisition authority. We're
going to continue to leverage the large
contracting organizations where that's necessary.
So, we still have those resources available to us
things like the Defense Innovation Unit. We have
a presence in Silicon Valley called the Defense
Innovation Unit that links specific
problems, in our case, AI problems
with specific vendors and small companies that can
respond to those problems and those requirements.
But within the JAIC, the acquisition authority
is an opportunity for us to show the same level
of agility in contracting so that we can actually
get to the small, innovative companies that
a lot of times don't have the ability to
work with the Department because it's so
hard to work for the Department. So, I think
it's a big win. We're going to look to use
this authority. You're right. It's a small
amount in the first year. We hope that we'll
be successful and so Congress will raise that
limit over time, depending on what our needs are.
But we want to leverage this to create consortiums,
create like a bidding environment for small
tasks. So that small companies that otherwise have
a really hard time working with the Department of
Defense will be able to do this much more agilely.
We think that this is a great opportunity for us
to expand the state-of-the-art and be
more inclusive with a broader set of
small, innovative companies to meet
more requirements inside the Department.
And if we learn, and this is good, then we'll
continue to grow it. The final thing I'll say
here is, I think that there's some real goodness
here also in using the JAIC and this acquisition
authority to develop a whole new cadre of
acquisition experts who know how to do AI
acquisition, they know what they're looking for.
They know what to ask for. They know what
kind of terms you put in those kinds of
contracts. So, a cadre of experts who know
AI acquisition and then, we can use that cadre
to spread the wealth, spread the knowledge and,
help others across the DOD to do this.
Craig:I'd like to relate all of this to the Joint
Common Foundation, particularly when you talk
about working directly with small startups in
Silicon Valley, many of whom are platform plays,
have developed platforms for different aspects
of the machine learning pipeline. Do those, once
acquired, go into the Joint Common Foundation?
I mean, how does the Joint Common Foundation
operate and where are you in
putting it together today?
Gen. Groen: So, the Joint Common Foundation
has been on the priority list for the JAIC
right from the beginning. And I think the genesis
of this idea was, so many would-be AI users across
the Department, even if they know what to
do, they don't have a platform to do it on.
And so, the preponderance of users across
the Department need help just getting started
in AI. Well, we need a place that we can start
working with them. We need a place that they
can bring their data. We need a place that
we can condition their data and label their
data or, whatever other work we need to do.
We need a place that we can store algorithms and,
once developed, maybe share algorithms. This
idea of clustering, right? Where if you have
similar problem sets, you can often use
the same model or the same algorithm. You
just train it with different data and it works.
We've done that many times here within the JAIC
to move an algorithm from one scenario to another
that has a very similar problem. We're able to
do that really quickly. We needed a place that we can catalog those algorithms, where
we can store them, where we can store training
data for different phenomena, for example.
So, the Joint Common Foundation has always
been the picture of that capability, but we
hadn't built it. So, over the last year, we've
really made a concerted effort to start building
the platform. We are not creating a private
data center and spending lots of money on a
building or, large numbers of servers, et cetera.
This is all built on a commercial cloud and it's
all built in really close teaming with, for
example, the Air force's platform one team,
really close teaming with special operations
and some of the networks that they operate.
Really close teaming with USDI and the Chief
Data Officer and several other key players,
the research and engineering organization here
inside the Department. We are putting our heads
together to figure out what is the best, most
economical way to present this capability to a
broad spectrum of users across the Department.
We're going to work together to do this,
to ensure that we're getting the most
cost effective, the most efficient
eliminating redundancies by planning together to
build this common foundation fabric, if you will.
That's that has a significant node that's built by
the JAIC here for AI work, but also leverages all
of the other tools associated with a common cloud
environment. So, we think that JAIC is as an
important AI component of that fabric, but the
way that we're thinking about the Joint Common
Foundation is actually growing to encompass
more elements of foundational information
and foundational data across Department.
That's really exciting for me. We're creating a
Dev[elopment,] Sec[urity and] Op[eration]s environment here
in the JAIC for AI development. So, if you have
services or organizations that don't have
a platform, but have some ideas and they
want a place to experiment, we're
building that environment for them.
So, we're talking to them a number of the
services, several of the agencies about,
okay, how do we get this platform? Once you
have the platform we put models, we put tools,
we put toolsets from multiple vendors. We use
multiple components of commercial cloud. It's
a place where we can now put training
information or education information.
We can put simulations on there. There's
a lot of things now that don't have a home
and that has been enough of a deterrent so that
we don't achieve those capabilities. Now we can do
those in a scaled common cost-effective way. And
so that's the core of the Joint Common Foundation.
As we move forward here, we think that'll evolve
into a model catalog, right? Where now we know where
models that have been developed across the
Department exist, so that we can repurpose
them for other consumers. We know where those
data sets are. It's almost a lending library
for the AI efforts across the Department. And
more importantly, as we move down the road to
things like the Joint All Domain Command and
Control program, where we start integrating AIs
across services and across warfighting functions.
This allows us to build like a Schengen zone,
right? Visa free, where you can travel from
one network environment to another without
having to show your passport. Taking the
security credentials, for example, from one place
in a container, into another part of the network,
another part of the Joint Common Foundation.
And we think that is the key to this integrated
war fighting. So, the whole approach to the common
foundation, what that does for disadvantaged
users who don't have a place to start
and what it does for operational war fighting
on the higher end and everything in between,
we just think is really important.
This fiscal year, especially we're really going
to move into implementation. We expect to have
what we call initial operating capability by
the end of February. And then I've challenged
the team here in the JCF team that. We
want to add a capability every month.
We want a new capability to drop every month.
This is a moving and expanding capability set
that we'll just continue to add on and we'll
invite other people to add capabilities on it, too.
So, it gives us a whole data ecosystem
that now can be used by large swaths of
the Department that currently don't have that.
Craig: Would the Department have open contracts
with these platforms and then put
them into the JCF so that somebody
in a service who wants to build something
can say, oh great, there's a platform for
labeling and we've already got it licensed so
I can log into it and start operating on it.
Is that how it's going to work?
Gen. Groen: So, it could work that way.
Elements could work that way. One of the important
aspects here is the data itself, right? So, if, if
it's Department of d=Defense data, it's government
intellectual property, and we want to make sure
that we're protecting that intellectual property.
And so, what we're not willing to do is
give our data away and then pay for algorithms
derived from our data, for example. So, the
JCF could be a place where government data could
exist and contractors could come onto the platform
to develop algorithms, for
example, and then generate a model.
And if we have more sensitive data and, as
we grow, we can start operating at a higher
classification level, then that's a place that
the government has oversight of that we can
ensure the security of our department data.
It is the most precious resource we have.
We have a ton of it. And right now, it's
just, in a lot of different places. We're
working here with the Chief Data Officer
for how we protect our IP and how we get
the most economical response from vendors.
So, we can bring in vendors onto our platform,
let them do work there and then preserve
the result. You could work at the other way,
if conditions allow that. And so, we're looking
at all these different options, but yes,
the JCF will be the place that we can do this
in support of programs across the Department.
It prevents everybody from
having to build their own.
Craig: And you say it's not quite
ready. What stage of development
is it at now? And what's the timeline?
Gen. Groen: Functional today. We haven't opened
it up for business yet, but, we tend to open at
the end of February and then we'll upgrade it.
Plan is to upgrade it once a month after that.
Craig: There's a new National Artificial
Intelligence Initiative Office in the White
House's Office of Science and Technology Policy.
What will the JAIC's relationship be to that office?
Gen. Groen: So, we don't know yet what form
that will take. It's welcome news. If it's an
inter-agency effort and the Department of Defense
is a participant, then we will likely be the
representative for the Department of Defense.
We've worked historically with things
like the White House Technology Office.
We've worked several initiatives with the
Department of Energy and some of the other
departments across the government. So, we're used to partnering in this space.
If we can share Department of Defense models
and algorithms, perhaps that would facilitate
some other elements of the US government.
Those are all the kinds of things that are on the
table as we look to partner. Still undefined kind of
like exactly what we would do in that environment,
but we have a history of working partnerships across the government.
We can do that pretty seamlessly. And if
the Department of Defense is part of that,
then it makes sense for us to be that node.
Craig: Well, thank you, General Groen. Presumably
you'll be in this role for a while, and
this is a space that moves very quickly.
I'd love to have a conversation with you again
in a year or so to see where the JAIC is.
Gen. Groen: I really appreciate the opportunity.
Great to have a conversation with you and,
just knowing the content of the blog and the kind
of people that you have on it, I'm honored to be
here at all. If I can be further used to you,
I'm very, very happy to move the dialogue.
It's obviously very important to us.
Craig: That's it for this week's podcast. I
want to thank General Groen for his time.
If you want to learn more about what we talked
about today, you can find a transcript of this
show on our website. That's eye-on.ai.
I also encourage you to listen to the
podcast series we've done for the National
Security Commission on AI at www.NSCAI.gov.
And remember, the singularity may not be near, but AI
is about to change your world. So, pay attention.